= Settler

Settler can be used for defining application wide settings in Rails. Settings are loaded from a YAML file and stored in the database using ActiveRecord to allow users to update settings on the fly. The YAML configuration allows you to not only specify defaults, but setting value validations and typecasts as well! 

== Requirements

* Activerecord, tested with Rails 2.3.5, 2.3.8 & rails 3.

== Installation
 
Install the gem

  gem install settler

And include the gem in your apps config

  config.gem 'settler'

Or install as a plugin if you must.  But gems are cooler.

  ./script/plugin install git://github.com/moiristo/settler.git

== Setup

* You must create the table used by the Setting model and install an initial configuration file. Simply run this command:
  
    rails2: ruby script/generate settler
    rails3: rails g settler

* This will create a migration and will add a settler.yml configuration file in your config directory. Now just migrate the database:
  
    rake db:migrate
  
* Next, you'll have to edit the settler.yml file, of which the details are described in the next section.

* You can manually set the configuration file source and default namespace as follows:
  - Settler.source = '/path/to/my/settler.yml'
  - Settler.namespace = 'staging'
  
== Configuration

The initial version of settler.yml contains example settings for every default Rails environment. A setting consists of at least a key and a value. Consider the following example:

    google_analytics_key: 
      alt: Google analytics key
      value: 'UA-xxxxxx-x'
      editable: true
      deletable: false
      validations:
        presence: true

In this case, 'google_analytics_key' is the key of the setting. Every nested property is either an attribute of the setting or a list of validations. Alt, value, editable and deletable are attributes of the Setting model. If a Setting with a given key does not exist, it is created with the attributes found. Therefore, you can consider these attributes as the default values for the setting. See the validations section for more info on validations. 

Note that you can use ERB in the configuration file if you need to. For example:

    google_analytics_key: 
      value: '<%= GOOGLE_ANALYTICS_KEY %>'

will evaluate the GOOGLE_ANALYTICS_KEY constant.

== Access settings

* Accessors will be created for every defined setting, returning a Setting instance:

    >> Settler.google_analytics_key
    Setting Load (0.7ms)   SELECT * FROM "settings" WHERE ("settings"."key" = 'google_analytics_key') LIMIT 1
    +----+----------------------+----------------------+------------+----------+-----------+
    | id | key                  | alt                  | value      | editable | deletable |
    +----+----------------------+----------------------+------------+----------+-----------+
    | 6  | google_analytics_key | Google analytics key | UA-xxxxx-x | true     | false     |
    +----+----------------------+----------------------+------------+----------+-----------+
  
* You can access a setting's value quickly by using the index operator:

    >> Settler[:google_analytics_key]
    Setting Load (0.7ms)   SELECT * FROM "settings" WHERE ("settings"."key" = 'google_analytics_key') LIMIT 1
    => "UA-xxxxx-x"
    
* Some named scopes for finding setting are available that may be useful as well:
  * Setting.editable: returns all editable settings.
  * Setting.deletable: returns all deletable settings.
  * Setting.deleted: returns all deleted settings.

== Typecasting

* Setting values can be typecasted to several types. This can easily be done by adding a 'typecast' property to the settler.yml. For example:

    float_value:
      alt: A float that should be typecasted
      value: '0.25'
      typecast: float
  
  will ensure that the value returned by this setting will always be a float (0.25) instead if the string representation of a float. 
  
* The following 'typecasters' are available by default:
  * integer
  * float
  * boolean

  Note: the boolean typecaster will yield true when the value is '1','t' or 'true' (case ignored), false otherwise.

* It is possible to create and use your own typecaster instead of the built in typecasters. A custom type caster should look like this:

    class CustomTypecaster < Typecaster
      def typecast(value)
        # typecast and return value
      end
    end

When you require this class in your application, you can easily use your typecaster by specifying its class name in the settler configuration:

    custom_value:
      alt: An integer that should be custom typecasted
      value: 1
      typecast: CustomTypecaster      
    
== Validations

* Validations are not stored in every setting, but are loaded on validation of a Setting instance. They apply to the value of the setting. The following validations can be created:
  - 'presence',  true/false.
  - 'inclusion', followed by a YAML array (e.g. ['a','b','c']). Accepts a comma separated string as well.
  - 'format', followed by a YAML regex (e.g. !ruby/regexp "/^UA-.{6}-.$/i"). String can be given as well, which will be converted to a regex. Note that you will not be able to pass regex modifiers in that case, therefore the YAML regex syntax is recommended.

== Changing / Destroying settings

* As settings are represented by a Setting ActiveRecord model, you can just update and destroy them like you would update or destroy any AR model.

* The 'key' attribute is read only as it should never be changed through your application.

* The 'editable', 'deletable' and 'deleted' attributes are protected from mass assignment using attr_protected.

* By default, settings will only be editable or deletable iff the corresponding attribute is set to 'true'. This will be enforced before saving or destroying a record:

    >> Settler.google_analytics_key.destroy
    Setting Load (0.7ms)   SELECT \* FROM "settings" WHERE ("settings"."key" = 'google_analytics_key') LIMIT 1
    => false
    
* As of version 1.2, settings can always be updated when using the update_attribute method. Before that version, a before_filter was used instead of a validation. Note that you can change the validation message for settings that cannot be changed by adding the key 'settler.errors.editable' to I18n. Defaults to: 'cannot be changed'.

* Settings can be reset to the values defined in the configuration file by calling reset!: 

    >> Settler.google_analytics_key.reset!
    => true

  Note that this will always work regardless of the 'editable' attribute, so be careful when using this method!
    
* The Setting model performs a soft delete when it is destroyed, meaning the record is not really destroyed, but just marked as deleted. The reason for doing this is because settings are reloaded from the configuration file when your application is (re)started, unless a setting is already available in the database. Therefore, it should know about all deleted settings, otherwise it would re-insert the deleted setting. If you want to enforce this behaviour, use Setting#delete instead.

== Advanced usage
  
* When you define an inclusion validation on a setting, you can access these values for use in web forms by calling 'valid_values' on the setting:

    >> Settler.search_algorithm.valid_values
    Setting Load (0.7ms)   SELECT * FROM "settings" WHERE ("settings"."key" = 'search_algorithm') LIMIT 1
    => ["ferret", "sphinx"]

  NB: This method returns nil when valid values cannot be found.

* Overriding setting attributes in the configuration is not as easy as it seems, since YAML doesn't support nested node merges. When overriding specific setting attributes, you should therefore do something like this:

    settings: &settings
      google_analytics_key: &google
        alt: Google analytics key
        value: 'UA-xxxxxx-x'

    development:
      <<: *settings  
      google_analytics_key:
        <<: *google
        alt: Development Google analytics key
        value: 'UA-xxxxxx-1'    
    
* Report missing / raise missing
  
  * You can tell Settler to report missing attributes:

      Settler.report_missing = true

    This will output a warning to STDOUT and the Rails logger to notify you that a missing setting was requested.

  * It is also possible to raise an exception instead when requesting missing attributes:

      Settler.raise_missing = true

== Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 Reinier de Lange. See LICENSE for details.
